# Saturday, April 2, 2022

## Words you can write with emoji only

Saw a tweet using emoji to write words and I had to script it out. https://gist.github.com/joe-no-body/f666ac9562d148512e777646ca7e660f

## The only ways I can make myself do things

#adhd

Caveat: I have developed these ideas since I started taking Vyvanse. YMMV

### 1. Seize the impulse

When I notice even the faintest urge to do something I've been putting off, I try to seize it and go with the flow. 

- At some point I realized that I actually do get the urge to do the things that I procrastinate on, but I often don't notice it because I get too fixated on my other negative feelings about the task.
- Example: I've had clean dishes sitting in my dishwasher for over a week now. When I went to the kitchen a little while ago, I remembered they were in there and, amidst my frustration, I noticed a slight inclination to put those away. Then, using point 2 below, I convinced myself to do it.

### 2. Pick out one tiny thing I can do

When a task feels big and daunting, I try to pick out one tiny, easy thing I can do and focus on that.

- I've always had trouble breaking down tasks. In my mind, problems tend to congeal into a single indistinct mass, like the intensely radioactive Elephant's Foot of Chernobyl. e.g. When I've got dirty dishes piled up in the sink that need to be rinsed and put in the dishwasher, I don't see individual dishes that need to be washed one by one. I just see this big _thing_ called "I need to do the dishes", with every negative feeling about the task -- feeling bad about putting it off, being kinda grossed out, the ADHD tendency to feel like even minor tasks are huge onerous burdens, etc. -- all mixed together in one big morass.
- In this case too, my negative feelings about the task are a distraction.
- The way I deal with this is by letting myself do one tiny thing.
- I guess this is what people mean when they say you should break down big projects, but that advice usually says to break down the whole project up front, which is usually counterproductive for my ADHD. Also, I've tried breaking down "simple" tasks like the dishes before and it just feels absurd. The key here is to break out just one single step and focus on that.
- Example: telling myself I would just put away the silverware from the dishwasher
