# Sunday, April 10, 2022

## Beginner concepts for programming

#teaching-programming #post-ideas

Thinking about key ideas to understand and improve as a programmer.

**Experimentation.** I think a willingness to experiment and play around is really important to get good at programming, but it's also a skill that takes practice. Whenever I have a question about how something works or if something is possible, I try to construct a tiny example and see what it does. This is really useful because it provides an immediate answer and it lets me answer questions myself that I don't even know how to search for or ask about in plain English.

**Start simple.** This is maybe more of an intermediate-level issue, but once you've learned the basics it can be tempting to make things more complicated than they need to be. 

**Abstraction.** This deserves its own section.


## Abstraction is the most important idea in computing

#teaching-programming #post-ideas

I've had thoughts about this for ages and this quote from SICP is the best articulation of the core idea that I've seen yet, at least in the specific context of programming languages:

> A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing a computer to perform tasks. The language also serves as a framework within which we organize our ideas about processes. Thus, when we describe a language, we should pay particular attention to the means that the language provides for combining simple ideas to form more complex ideas. ([SICP](https://sourceacademy.org/sicpjs/1.1))

Abstraction is terribly overlooked in beginner and intermediate-level programming instruction. I can't speak for every resource ever, because obviously there are exceptions like SICP, but among the countless beginner-level resources I've see and even in my CS program, I never saw it directly addressed. Forms of abstraction came up all the time, of course, but nobody ever emphasized abstraction as an overarching concept. Instead, the emphasis was overwhelmingly on, as SICP states, programming as telling the computer what to do.

I think this does a tremendous disservice to newer programmers. Abstraction is such an essential tool that not having it hamstrings your entire ability to think about and understand computing.



Abstraction is everywhere:

- functions
- data structures
- classes
- modules
- libraries
- programming languages
- programming paradigms
- the kernel
- assembly languages
- instruction set architectures
- the OSI model
- and many, many more


