# Wednesday, March 9, 2022

## fixing slow shell startup times

I've been annoyed by slow shell startup times for a while now. it hasn't quite
been bad enough to be a serious issue, but I'm impatient and having a very
perceptible lag between opening a terminal and getting my shell prompt is
irritating, so I decided to fix it.

- timing each .zsh.d script's execution
  - `date +%s.%N` (gdate on mac)

- lazy-loading sourced files
  - I have a couple utilities like `nvm` and `rvm` that have to be installed
    sourcing a script in my .zshrc config. it turns out this is slow
  - the fix: lazy-loading
  - the old way
    ```sh
    export NVM_DIR="$HOME/.nvm" 
    [ -s "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh"
    [ -s "$NVM_DIR/bash_completion" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/bash_completion"
    ```
  - the new way:
    ```sh
    if [[ ! -v NVM_DIR ]]; then
      nvm() {
        export NVM_DIR="$HOME/.nvm"
        [ -s "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh"  # This loads nvm
        [ -s "$NVM_DIR/bash_completion" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/bash_completion"  # This loads nvm bash_completion
        nvm "$@"
      }
    fi
    ```

## why i3 is great for ADHD and what I want from computers in general

- i3 
  - predictable
    - keeps everything in the same place
    - allows iteration in a predictable order
    - allows intentional ordering
  - keeps everything **visible** with little effort
  - allows naming things so they're easier to understand
- stacking window managers
  - window order changes with every navigation
  - window order is based on recency of use, so unintentional actions change the
    order in unexpected ways that are hard to fit into memory
    - I say _unintentional actions_ very deliberately here - these actions can
      be accidental, but they are not only accidents. they are any action that is not _intended_ to alter the order of navigation
    - for example, I often cmd+tab over to my Bitwarden to grab a password and
      then swap back to my previous window. because I don't intend this action
      to alter the window order, I usually find myself cmd+tabbing back to
      Bitwarden by mistake, because it's now near the top of the stack where I
      don't want it. then, after I've gotten, say, VS Code and Vivaldi back at
      the top of the stack where I want them, I'll often end up doing it again
      when I try to swap to the third app down (e.g. Slack), which also brings
      Bitwarden back to the top where I don't fucking want it!
    - so this single _unintentional_ act of switching to Bitwarden for five
      seconds now disrupts the entire order of my windows unless and until I go
      through and intentionally focus each app that I want at the top of the stack
  - on macOS, it has the obnoxious separation between apps and windows that
    makes things even more annoying
    - switching to an app brings all its windows to the front, even if I didn't
      want that, making it very annoying to have extra windows in the background
- in a stacking window manager, all my windows are just a big messy pile of
  crap. even the simple act of quickly switching between windows when I have
  more than two open is a huge pain
  
- key quality criteria
  - **visibility** - at a glance, I can see all the workspaces I have open and
    every window (or top-level container, at least) on my current workspace
    - but also, visibility is _usefully constrained_ - the only windows I see
      are the top-level containers on the current workspace. other workspaces
      are reduced to their names and numbers
    - by contrast, on macOS I have to cmd+tab through every application I have
      open, even ones not on the current workspace
    - I've noticed that this has influenced the way I organize my windows. I
      used to snap them rigidly to corners using Spectacle/Rectangle, but since
      using i3 I've started to use more hapahazard window layouts which are
      optimized for visibility.
      - e.g. I'll drag one main window to cover most of the screen, but leave
        gaps around the edges where I'll keep various web browser windows so
        they're always visible. that way I can just click on the one I want and
        use that instead of having to cmd+tab or search around too much with
        Exposé
  - **predictability** - window order is fixed in a 2D spatial layout and I know
    what will be selected if I move in any direction (with some annoying and
    limited exceptions)
  - **intentionality** - the order of navigation is predictable because it is
    intentional. _I choose_ where each window goes and it stays there, which
    means I naturally have a better feeling of where things are at
  - **associativity** - related windows stay together in workspaces, organized
    by containers
    - general purpose windows (e.g. my password manager) can be hidden on the
      scratchpad and revealed when needed on any workspace
    - groups of related windows can be grouped hierarchically within workspaces
      for better organization. e.g. for a web dev project using Django and HTMX,
      I might have a stack of browser windows open next to my editor, with one
      window for Django docs, one for HTMX, JS, and HTML docs, and one with my
      app open for testing. this extends predictability - I know where all of my
      browser windows are and what order they're in because I have intentionally
      grouped them by a theme.
    - associativity is enabled by the above criteria. macOS and Windows also
      have workspaces, but every extra window makes them increasingly unwieldy
      -- less visible and less predictable. thus, I have to intentionally pare
      down and reorganize my windows more aggressively to maintain an effective
      workspace

- gripes
  - would be nice to more easily persist windows and groups of windows
  - I wish I could like... drag a stack of browser tabs or a VS Code window (or
    even a whole workspace) to my notes and have a little widget appear that I
    could then click on to reopen everything where I left off

- how this applies to other tools
  - usefully constrained visibility is something I think I need a lot. the
    number one thing I've tried to get out of any task manager is the ability to
    easily see high level tasks and drill down into sets of related actions
    - for my organization system at work, I keep a daily notebook with my
      schedule, planned tasks, and a log of my work, along with a stack of index
      cards, one for each ongoing project. the notebook provides a view of my
      day and a place for ongoing notes, while the notecards provide a view of
      my specific tasks. I can glance at their titles to get the high level
      view, then pull out the ones to focus on to get a view of specific actions
