# Sunday, March 13, 2022

## calling FaaS and PaaS "serverless" is stolen valor

#post-ideas

I realized recently what irks me about the term "serverless". It's the irony of
referring to online-only *aaS products as "serverless" while the push to SaaS
means so many things that used to be truly serverless now require an internet
connection just to function.

- my old PS2 games will still work if I pull my PS2 out of the closet or run
  them in an emulator, but many of my PS3 games (Mass Effect 2 and Gran Turismo
  5 come to mind) have functionality that I just can't access anymore because
  the servers are offline

- I don't game that much on my PS4 anymore, in part because it seems like every
  time I get the urge to play a PS4 game, I end up needing to install a 69
  gigabyte patch that takes 2 hours to download, by which time I no longer care

- most games used to have local multiplayer and LAN multiplayer that you could
  use without any connection to a server, but now you often need a connection
  back to the developer's servers even if you just want to play with your
  friends

- I used to use YNAB as my budgeting software. I loved the fact that its desktop
  and phone apps synced using Dropbox so I didn't have to rely on YNAB's
  servers. then they announced they were switching to a SaaS model. instead of
  running on the desktop, the new version was an online-only web application.
  they kept pestering me to try it out, so I reluctantly gave it a shot and I
  hated it. not only were they discontinuing support for the desktop version,
  but the SaaS product cut out a huge amount of useful functionality. I
  stubbornly kept using YNAB 4 on desktop until I migrated to Linux as my
  primary OS, at which point I switched to hledger and never looked back

## Linux on the desktop

Every once in a while, it still catches me by surprise to think about the fact
that I've been using Linux full time as my primary OS for over three years now
(since July 1, 2018, based on old tweets of mine).

I guess I spent so long thinking of it as a daunting challenge that the reality
of it is surprisingly easy.
